I lived once on the ocean floor,
All robot help and sliding doors,
And thought seldom of the shore.
Until I received one night
A letter from my grandfather,
And the letter read:
"Dear Empty Head,
Ye who dwell on ocean's bed,
I send this by the cracked moon's light,
It likely be the last I write.
I'll take soon flight
For a long journey's while
To the Ninth Isle,
Remember me as I will you,
All tree houses and untied shoe,
In hope someday we meet again,
Your distant kin, Sebastian."
But a farewell by letter is little better
Than no farewell at all, so on a young man's whim,
For my grandfather, I set off in search of him...
I left by quiet my stately keep,
The escape was easy, guards asleep,
And wandered 'bout on tiptoe feet,
The tall glass halls and cold steel streets,
And found, at last, an airlock,
But for love or none
Could find no life suit or aqualung.
So, deep breath then,
I go to find Sebastian.
Then airlock open,
And off into the freezing hug of the dark ocean,
And struggling up, heart kicking like a drum then,
Limbs and lungs all done then,
And the next thing I knew, I woke again.
All gasping and flail, and wet as whales,
And most pinned by wind
And water, a storm, ye, a storm,
Hell's teeth, and I at the center.
And I, swimming as though possessed,
And I, to die, and senses arrested,
And kick my legs in fit of fear
And knew no north from south or my mouth from my arse, as I rolled about in the water.
But God, air, and true wind on my face,
For I had not known such a thing
In all my remembering,
And though I might well drown and sink true down to the ocean floor once more in but a minute's stem,
For this moment, swirling in those salt eddies, I was a boy again.
And stormy though the night was hung,
Beyond that storm, I knew, the Sun.
Nay, but I was still at fate's behest, and had no interest in the valley of death,
And by width and breadth did trial about a long while,
And the water did carry me along and put my soul and breath asunder,
So this is how it ends, the long going under.
And with water in my mouth, goodnight.
Yes, give up air and everywhere,
Yes, goodnight. I go to seek a water sleep.
But fate was hard at play
And I woke again, this time day,
The storm a year away
So far as the sky told that story,
A beach whereupon the sea had spat me out like some dislikeable pip.
And I alive and washed ashore with bones and balls all sore,
And what's more, there in the sky's maw
Was the moon in cracked spoils of dead rock,
As though God Himself had struck it with his mighty Galactic co-
But nay, there a man approached along the sand and called to see if I was all right.
And his face became familiar of a sudden.
"Grandfather?" I said.
"Err, no?" replied he with concerned eyes on me and continued,
"Sir, whatever ordeal you've just been through
Has perhaps relieved the sense from you.
May I ask your name?"
And though I did my best not to show it –
My name, I realized, I did not know it.
And my companion helped me to my feet, led me down the beach,
And I walked bent double,
Still reeling from the morning's trouble.
Then said he, checking my memory,
"And how old is your grandfather?"
Said I, "I don't recall at all. Perhaps you're right, I'm rattled slight from the ocean."
"Okay," he said, "then which island is it you're from?"
"I'm not from an island," I said.
"I hail from beneath the sea and that great aquatic nursery.
For I am but twenty-one years old,
And from youth's throws, I escaped the watery below
For one last hour with the man who taught me all I know."
And slow he said, "But you are too young. You shouldn't be above the water.
Not until their one-hundredth year
Can nursery folk yet come up here."
I only avoided his chiding stare
And took great gulps of salt sea air.
Finally he said, "I think it best we find this grandfather of yours and get you to safe keeping.
No isle is distant, mind,
And I've a vehicle of my own design.
Come along. We'll make it wherever together."
And he led me to some great balloon whereupon we got in,
And though he touched no gauge or board,
The craft set off of its own accord.
We were out over the water then, and I saw the stories were true, so these lands were an archipelago,
many islands scattered higgledy here and there, and I shouted to the man,
"Are they a totality?"
"Nay," said he, "each is its own little principality,
And just like your nursery, one lives on the isle fitting of their age –
As you were too, if the rules you actually obeyed."
And pointing then he shouted:
"There that land of birch and oak
Does house those juvenile century folk,
And there that land with beach and pier
Suits those in their two hundredth year,
The three hundreders are to the west,
The fourth prefer the forest best,
And so on, I shan't recount them all,
We've not far to go and our time is small."
"Sir," I said, "with all these folk living so high on time's shelf,
I wonder if I might ask you how old you are yourself?"
And he replied, "Let's say if there be a tree
That needs watering once a century,
Then I have filled my watering can eight times so far."
I could not help but stare at this man who, ignoring his demeanor,
Appeared physically only five years my senior,
And in perfect health, but had somehow, eventually, aged eight centuries.
And before I could comment there appeared, upon the horizon,
Rising up skywards,
Some needle wound
At least ten thousand feet 'bove ground.
"Vishnu's arse!" I cried, "What is that?"
"A tower, whereby," he did reply,
"It kisses tongues the edge of sky,
And if you were to reach its spire,
You'd see the breadth of space entire.
It proves most convenient for ascending objects into orbit without need of fuel or speed.
And though keep your eyes open yet," he mumbled slight,
And five seconds hence did see him right,
For overhead and yonder yet
Were craft wide as twenty jumbo jets,
Seemingly sitting there in the air by dare of whim.
"Oh gods, you're all so clever!" I cried. "You built all of this?"
"Aye," he said. "Year to year ascended each
By hammer's knack and number's reach."
And quite a while we watched the scene,
His face sincere, then turned to me and said, "Young man,
be honest, What is it you want with your grandfather? Really?
Are you so bold, you can't just let the old be old?"
"Nay," I said, "I wish to talk with he who by longevitys, like you, has endured the centuries.
Besides he says he's going elsewhere and I'd like to follow him there.
His letter said the Isle of nines If that's his ground That's where I'm bound.
Actually, I wonder if I asked, dare you to get me there."
He was quiet a while, pokered face No smiles, and said
"so you think age leads to becoming some Great Sage do you?
Yes, I'll get you to your grandfather
But we'll take the scenic route on our way to the Isle of the nines"
"Fine," said I
our bearing changed then South was bound for some small spit of sandy ground
"I think," said he, "we'll search about and see if we can't out some of that wisdom you crave"
and before I could protest we'd set down and come ashore and were bounding over pier floor
and up then sand and jungle thick and Cut our way with will and stick and emerged before a town
in the suburbs folk were felling trees and hauling Shore great carts of iron ore
then further in were folk who looked as young as I and dancing 'Neath the broke moon sky
all necking bottles gin and beer then coupling up to disappear
which Isle is this, I asked my Friend. I'm barely two decades old they act younger yet.
The Isle of ones said he all here have aged at least one century
He left me down the winding paths of open debauchery and open bars
and folk who clear appeared They slept perhaps three days a year
and we came upon a woman bare, all dancing legs and wild blonde hair
My friend proclaimed "Oh Lady mayor I've brought for thee one cub straight from the nursery
and he has questions for his elders"
She regarded me with red eyes and regard tireder yet and said "nursery, huh?
Why here we've ditched the milk, but kept the bottle, ask away young Aristotle"
and the music did stop and all folk turned about with their drunk Blair stares poking out
and the lady mayor of the Isle of ones did close her eyes in great profund
I murmured "why, I am young and confused about everything and sure of nothing
but above all I should like to know how does one live well?
And how does one see far?
and how does one want for nothing and still acquire everything?"
I leant sure close and cupped my ear, the wisdom of one in her 100 years
whereby she replied, "the secret to acquiring everything? Buy it
how to see far? Squint
and how to live well? Well
I'd suggest you found your answer here for we've loads of drugs and high strength beer!"
and though I cried out for Clarification it was surely the end of that conversation
and my new companion led me back past trees and Lagoon to our waiting bright balloon
"What," I said, with confusion fat, "the holy
Fucking shit was that?"
and off we left it over the beach up Once again into the wind's reach.
"Look," he said, "True they're all one century
But since we live at least nine in these enlightened times they are but teenagers still. Aging is a relative thing
It wasn't long after life extension was perfected
We noticed that the older one dares to grow the more they prefer the company of those in years close to theirs They know
that is why each age lives on its own isle. You would have little of importance to say to a child
such is the gap ten times wider with us. So there it is."
I said, "'So there it is.' Why, my grandfather liked that phrase also."
"That may be," said he, "and yet your grandfather is not me."
And following his dead-end boon, I set eyes upon the fractured moon
I said, "Our pale lady of the night is not looking quite right
what happened to her?" "The Fall," he called. "Why, the world wasn't always such a peaceable place.
We once used to play war to keep score."
"How does one blow up a moon?" "By being smart enough to build technology that can do so and
simultaneously stupid enough to use it.
"Not too long from now, pieces of her will fall to the ground
and if any of us are still around by then, the air will turn deathly
and for sure no living thing will endure.
Save for those living beneath the sea." "Like me," I said,
"and what will everyone still above the sea do instead?"
He said "We've another destination in mind, where we might start over sensibly this time."
With a squint I call sight just slight of rising constructs in the far,
spires and towers for a crown, sure the mark of a city or town.
Said I, "Start over where? Over there?"
Said he, "Nay that is but the remains of nations
why sometimes on a new morning one can still make out the old world."
Said I "Well, who lives there?" "No one," he said, "Or the remains of the debt
the legacy of our forefathers, who'd rather blow up a moon than two teams agree on some tune
they might both peaceably dance to. To hell with them. For all our modern wonders, it's taken millennia to recover from their blunders.
And from the smallest of corners of my mind's eye
I Saw and heard the bright sounds of those dead towns
the blaring horns and thousand forms of life to those days prior to whatever
fire they cast on themselves. Back before science had learned to stand in defiance of aging and death, and almost under his breath
My old companion said, "The cruel irony is that many folk from that barbaric time still survive today since aging technology went their way
yet the human brain can only contain so many memories and so as they've aged they've forgotten the truth
of what they did to our planet and moon in their youth
and though the Catastrophes live on in their name they have by quirk of dementia escaped the blame.
What luck, what shame."
I said, "But you assume from the ruins that they knew what they were doing.
Maybe they meant well with their inventions and broke the world in spite of their best intentions?
"Right," he said, "I'm sure in their empty heads when they poisoned the ocean and took their wars to the moon they were really doing it for love and big bright red balloons."
And he looked off from our basket a moment and said,
"Sorry." Said I, "Don't apologize, why, all that anger in your eyes
makes me just then remember my grandfather's temper you so resemble him, see."
"That may be," said he, "and yet your grandfather is not me."
And I glanced ahead to find we were coming down again, not in a forest this time but a town of some kind.
Stark marble pillars and great mansions and villas and when we sat down a man came around and said,
"Welcome friends, why, please enjoy your stay- if you're going to park on the beach, by the way,
that'll be 20,000 shells." "Oh, add it to my tab," my companion said,
and with my confusion stark, we pushed on into a park
at the base of each tree, a sign declared a fee of 10,000 shells for sitting in its shade.
Likewise looking at the birds would cost the third of what one in a month, made.
So too were their charges for drinking from the water fountains or stopping to marvel at the mountains.
and we wandered down ostentatious and spacious streets,
and found we'd meet with folk tired and thin walking hurried checking their devices greeting each other with declarations of stock prices
Then pass piles of shells in little Laos and even the dirt and ants have been valued with little price tags
And we found a great conch shell a man waited outside so thin I wondered if he might already have died
My companion said sir, Mayor Hello. The mayor replied. Yes. Have you come about my stock portfolio?
Ah, no, this is my friend from beneath the sea and if you've a moment, he has some questions for thee. Yes
I said I'd like to know of you. How does one live well, and how does one see far?
And how does one the mayor interrupted and how many shells will you pay me to answer these?
none admittedly I said but you do look a little hungry and if you like you can have this banana for free
he snatched it from Me at once and said, ah I see this will revolutionize the economy
I said they literally grow on trees for free,
but he was already off on some tirade about the banana trade
He yelled. Why by this time next week? I'll be a banana coin billionaire
My companion led me away said perhaps that's enough economics for today
And we fled the commotion past the starving, Rich masses to our balloon back over the ocean
My companion said when the ones twos and threes are bored of their parties
They move for a while to the aisles of the fours fives and sixes to pursue a game of riches
I said But they're all starving themselves. Yes. He said but look at all their pretty shells Eh, don't worry yourself
by the time they reach their 7th century. It becomes pretty evidentiary
There's more to the world than just wealth said I but what's the point in all this?
undying populations on little island nations Hosting parties heeding the markets call
while above each day The moon sidles closer to come crashing down and ending at all.
Why my companion said
though It's easy to miss there is a point to all this
The ones twos and threes they party nightly Yes,
but by day they mind the metal and fell the trees we need for new technologies for spaceship walls and ceiling beams Exotic matter machines,
then the fours fives and sixes why they don't just pursue riches
by evening They take the felled trees and ore and ensure by the great space tether that it is all ascended into orbit then assembled together
into one great metal vessel
It is the most ambitious thing ever built from man's imagining
and not a few weeks from now 10 million of us
Will empty our drawers and lock our doors and kiss. Goodbye the Mountains and valleys and climb to that waiting galley
and once boarded each find ourselves afforded Four-poster cryogenic beds there to lay our heads for decades yet
and then in liquid nitrogen 10 liters deep 10 million souls in no dreams sleep
and each space support that isn't there to accommodate our frozen beds
will carry instead What's left of the past each species will ride with us
from cabbage tree to New zealand kauri every Evergreen and deciduous, cedar, to cork, to eucalyptus every genus and Venus flytrap
kept maintained by clockwork brains
And what's more pig, donkey, boar, fly, swan, Crustacean, Dalmatian, domestic Or wild we've every gene on Petri filed.
hell Neanderthals and early man too
and we fly. out beyond the broken moon a hard left past Jupiter. We wish him Goodbye
passing straight through the Oort cloud Turning about to enjoy the view
then setting sail on physics not so much in numbers indenture
But stolen from one of God's more surreal magic mushroom adventures
contracting space before our noses Expanding it beyond our asses
will show time and Einstein a thing or two
until we fly faster than Zeno's racing tortoise
or poor Swift Achilles who trailed then after and
and Roused again we'll find we have arrived on the doorstep of a new house
Gravity that of earth and with an Earth's worth already of forests, and seas, and lakes, and trees
and in the midday sky We'll find not one Sun as we had before
but two in Circumbinary awe.
and though we'll bring food and clothes and build schools and roads
and paint our mark on every damage of the thing So it one great living pearl among 10,000 dead world's
not a gram of our stupid past and smuggle itself down onto the ground
No Denial of what is in favor of what one wishes
no slinking off to watch TV and leaving some other poor bastard to do the dishes.
science, truth, art, objectivity, universal human regard
then finally the death of war and ignorance
and that Infernal library of excuses for I, me, my while you still lie in the gutter and starve and die
We will build a world untainted by selfish bastards where we'll be free range humans at last
and do whatever we fucking like all day and lay great brilliant eggs of knowledge and wisdom
and live under two suns at The expense of no one
finally out under the above for love for love
That is the night Isle and we set off and not a week's while
for our species. Try a one last. Pardon
We are going alone together
back to the garden
Ah Said me, sounds swell and what about those of us in the nursery do we get to come as well.
that's complicated. He said
we approached at last over a new isle of yet another style
My companion said to me why it seems you and I are at the end of our journey
the Isle of the eights For almost the century that has been the land upon where I lay my hat
Over we passed I peeked in through the glass of the windows all wide and saw books stacked as towers and folk reading inside
What do they do? I said they and you
Said he I told you of the soon trip to our new home
and though we have solved much of the perils of travels in Space
there is but one more problem we faced on
our journey We want to take with us every film and thesis every book and treatise the mulch of every culture
But not even the moon would have enough room to store those works physically
and digitally If we were to store it That way
cosmic rays would see wipe it right out in but a few hundred days mid-flight
and so we found a method Yes a fur
Human brains
each seven and eight like me commits to their memory some chosen book or speech to preserve until we reach the new house
We learn to remember to not forget I said and which work lives in your head
said he prose and poetry Eighteenth to 23rd century
for like you I once had a grandfather who showed me the world in a manner I could understand
Back when the old world was still new and so was I I'd sit on his knee and he'd reached me long into the evening
of fiction and farce or whatever I asked and for all those stories absurd they gave me a passion for the percussion of words and
That's how I knew what it was. I'd remember
I said and your grandfather now is he Yet still alive?
but our basket sat down then at last we'd arrived.
we Disembarked single file on another new Beach on another new Isle
nay. I said wait, I remember this land aye, he said it's the same from the one we began
and then standing not feet from our great steed balloon was a woman there Staring at the dead fractured moon
the woman called out why what a fair moon this evening aged So it's the exudes a vital glow
she turned on me said though true the same cannot be said for you
Well, no I said since I am not aged so
my companion bowed his head said nothing Oh ye
she said what the centuries have done to your memory.
I replied you must be mistaken I am from the nursery
said she there is nursing there certainly, but for those so aged they cannot nurse themselves
I am the matron of the nursing dome and I am here to take you home
by choice Will you come back with me or need I summon armed security
now Look I said I am 20 or 21 rather and I have come to find my grandfather
So why she said yet? You walk hunched and move slow such would we expect of one born a millennium ago?
What said I and raised a hand to my eyes and found the skin was cracked and cold or one might venture old
She said how to put it Well, oh, yes Your generation is the reason the fall fell
all greed and in need of speed and more patting yourselves on the back for progress
Meanwhile, leaving every garden unweeded and all who fell behind unfed then dead
You have been honorably discharged of being dishonorably in charge
and while we aren't as cruel as to have you all put down We sure Shant opt for having you around
and so you are most welcome to the ocean floor where you shan't ruin the world Yet more.
Yeh beneath the sea there are jigsaw puzzles and rocking chairs that wait again for thee next time
We'll be sure to lock the doors. I am taking you back to the seabed once more
to the matron My companion said why I'm sorry. I took him on a tour of the land I only hoped he'd remember or at least understand
but before you bring him home might for five minutes you leave us alone
Rose a skeptical eyebrow on her skeptical face though. She nodded and plodded off some while away
Oh gods, I cried and closed my eyes to my companion I said this is the dementia you mentioned.
Yes he said I thought maybe with an hour or two it would come back to you and you'd return to the nursing dome on your
Own it's time for you to go home if there's anything I can do for you
Yes You can said I let me lie here for the rest of my days
above the water in some semblance of a dignified way
I'm sorry. I'm so sorry. He said I wish you luck in all hence.
I said don't apologize There's no taken offense
Why in a day or two I suppose I'll remember neither the beach nor you
Thank you for my big day out.
We hugged them in the awkward male fashion two loose grips and a little back tapping
He turned about bound inland bound starwort.
No great elation. No great despair I simply gulped the salt sea air
and wondered then if I would ever breathe it again
My companion paused and turned about let out they gave me an early warning
the nursing dome I mean when you made your great escape
Gave me time to reach the beach and wait in hope you'd rise alive from the waters
And so you did and so I found you
Early warning why I said What're you to me or I to thee
he said my grandfather was never the sort to go quietly Once caught
said I that may be and yet your grandfather is not me
said he
but you are
Have you been so by time defiled? You don't recall your own grandchild?
It was I who sent a letter hoping for the better you'd recall who I was
and though you remembered me fine You mixed me up in time. I did not want to leave you down here without one last try Oh, goodbye
I didn't know for my sake you'd stage a fucking Prison Break. I only meant to say goodbye
Well I said then hello
Oh God I remember
between the fields and owls and Shrike long hours teaching you how to ride a bike.
Yes He said yes said me
I remember year upon my knee and from the elm tree sat ten starlings deep and I'd read to you till you fell asleep
Yeah, he said
and the alphabet and cigarettes and Ethernet and tape cassettes
it was the old world and I think of it every day and I think of you on the sea bed every day
and because Ruin the world or not You are my grandfather and I am your blood
and while you may not remember those Kindnesses you did me when I was little I do and I will remember for both of us
And if one day I have children, I will tell them of you
So they even when I am gone your kindnesses will thread on down the hooks of your descendants
And then your kindnesses will never die
And when both of us are gone when we're only stories it will still live on
until there and all the time and space snuff To dust and dust enough. There'll be two facts lying leftover in dead eternity
that You are my grandfather and I loved you
and I cannot spend another week worrying that alone and decrepit beneath the sea sits you while I won't soft as Xanadu
even if I make it to the edge of space over the threshold We'll still be there your old sad face
I said yet all the while you are still bound for the ninth Isle and I for jigsaws and sliding doors
I just hope you recall me in good stead
he replied then you may wish of me the same tomorrow for I am staying right beside your empty head
and I Protested but you set off for the Stars in not a week You said
Rockets be damned said my grandson one day they'll build another. It's what humans do
but grandfathers are a one-time Construction and these may be my last days with you.
Let's run back to the old world. Let's find the tree ten starlings deep and I'll read you till you fall asleep
and if little pieces of yesterday come back to you Whenever
then tell me and we'll remember them together
and back down the beach back to the balloon We're off on the wind then and under the moon
at lasts borne back ceaselessly into the past
And from our basket Sebastian yelled with all his might.
Hey matron go fuck yourself big kiss. Good night
The new world pulled away behind and on some perfect fever dreams frontier the old world drew near
something Waited and though dead for sure it waited to receive us once More
and my grandson began to shout the poems would known from the tomes we'd owned and the lines came back easily even to me
We remembered we remembered together.
Let us go then you and I he yelled when the evening is spread out against the sky I replied
like a patient etherized upon a table Let us go through certain half-deserted streets the muttering retreats
of restless nights and one night cheap hotels and Sawdust restaurants with oysters
about about in reel and route the deaf fires Danced at night the water like a witch's oils burned green and blue and white
and summoned dreams Assured world the spirit that plagued us so nine fathom deep here followed us from the land of mist and snow
In Xanadu did Kubla Khan a stately pleasure-dome decree where alph the sacred River ran through caverns measureless to man down to a sunless sea
So twice five miles of fertile ground with walls and towers were girth round and there were Gardens bright with sinuous rills Where blossomed many an incense bearing trees and he were forest
(V.O fades out)